The Little Prince
Written by Antoine de St. Exupery
English translation by David Wilkinson
Audio read by [your name here]

----NewFile----

Dedication

To Leon Werth

I apologise to the children for having dedicated this book to a grown-up. 
I have a good excuse: this grown-up is the best friend I have in the world. 
I have another excuse: this grown-up can understand everything, even books for children. 
I have a third excuse: this grown-up lives in France, where he is hungry and cold. 
He really needs to be comforted. 
If all these excuses are not enough, I would like to dedicate this book to the child that this grown-up used to be. 
All grown-ups have first been children. 
(But few of them remember it.) 
I thus correct my dedication:

To Leon Werth

when he was a little boy.

----NewFile----

Chapter I

When I was six years old, I once saw a magnificent picture in a book about the primeval forest called ‘Real-life Stories.’ 
It showed a boa constrictor swallowing a wild animal. 
Here is a copy of the drawing. 

It said in the book: “Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it. 
Then they are no longer able to move, and they sleep for the six months it takes for digestion.” 

So I thought a lot about the adventures of the jungle |and, in turn, I managed, with a coloured pencil, to sketch my first drawing. 
My Drawing No. 1. 
It was like this:

I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups and I asked them if my drawing frightened them.

They answered me: “Why would a hat be frightening?”

My drawing did not depict a hat. 
It showed a boa constrictor digesting an elephant.
I then drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could understand.
They always need to have explanations. 
My Drawing No. 2 was like this:

The grown-ups advised me to set aside drawings of boa constrictors, open or closed, |and to apply myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. 
That's how I abandoned, at the age of six, a magnificent career as a painter.
I had been discouraged by the failure of my Drawing No. 1 and of my Drawing No. 2. 
Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves, |and it’s tiresome for children to always explain things for them again and again. 

So I had to choose another profession, and I learned to fly airplanes.
I flew pretty much everywhere in the world. 
And geography, it's true, has served me well.
I could recognise, at first glance, whether it was China or Arizona. 
It’s very useful if you get lost during the night.

I thus had, during the course of my life, a lot of contact with many persons of consequence.
I have lived a lot among the grown-ups. 
I have seen them from close up.
It hasn’t much improved my opinion of them.

Whenever I met one that seemed a bit more clear-sighted, I tried the experiment of showing them my Drawing No. 1, which I've always kept. 
I wanted to know if he was really a person of true understanding. 
But he always responded: “It's a hat.” 
So I wouldn't speak to him about boa constrictors, nor about primeval forests, nor about the stars. 
I would put myself at his level. 
I would talk to him about bridge, golf, politics and neckties. 
And the grown-up was glad to know such a sensible man.

----NewFile----

Chapter II

Thus, I lived alone, without anyone I could truly talk to, |until a breakdown in the Sahara desert, six years ago. 
Something had broken in my engine. 
And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers, I prepared myself to try and carry out, all alone, a difficult repair. 
For me it was a matter of life or death. 
I had hardly enough water to drink for eight days.

The first night I fell asleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any human habitation. 
I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean. 
So you can imagine my surprise when at daybreak, a strange little voice woke me up. 
It said:

“Please… draw me a sheep!”

“What?”

“Draw me a sheep... ”

I jumped to my feet as if I’d been struck by lightning. 
I rubbed my eyes. 
I took a good look. 
And I saw a quite extraordinary little fellow, who was examining me seriously. 
Here is the best portrait that I later managed to do of him. 
But my drawing, of course, is much less charming than its model. 
It's not my fault. 
I was discouraged in my career as a painter by the grown-ups, at the age of six, |and I hadn't learned to draw anything, except closed boas and open boas.

So I stared at this sudden apparition wide eyed with astonishment. 
Remember that I was a thousand miles from any inhabited region. 
And yet my little fellow seemed neither lost, nor half-dead with fatigue, nor starved or dying of thirst or fear. 
He looked nothing like a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any inhabited region. 
When I finally managed to speak, I said:

“But... what are you doing here?”

And then he repeated, very slowly, as if it were something of great consequence:

“Please… draw me a sheep…”

When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. 
As absurd as it seemed to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and at risk of dying, |I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and a pen. 
But then I remembered that I had mostly studied geography, history, arithmetic and grammar, |and I told the little fellow (a little crossly) that I didn’t know how to draw. 
He replied:

“It doesn't matter. 
Draw me a sheep.”

As I’d never drawn a sheep, I redid for him one of the only two drawings of which I was capable. 
The one of the closed boa. 
And I was astounded to hear the little fellow respond:

“No! 
No! I don’t want an elephant inside a boa. 
A boa is very dangerous, and an elephant is very cumbersome. 
Where I live everything is very small. 
I need a sheep. 
Draw me a sheep.”

So I drew.

He looked carefully, then:

“No! 
That one’s already very sick. 
Make another one.”

I drew:

My friend smiled gently and indulgently:

“You can see yourself… this isn’t a sheep, it's a ram. 
It has horns… “

So once again I redid my drawing:

But it was rejected, like the previous ones:

“That one’s too old. 
I want a sheep that will live a long time.”

So, lacking patience, as I was eager to start dismantling my engine, I hastily sketched this drawing:

And I snapped:

“This here is the box. 
The sheep you want is inside.”

But I was very surprised to see the face of my young judge light up:

“It's exactly how I wanted it! 
Do you think this sheep needs a lot of grass?”

“Why?”

“Because where I live everything is very small…”

“There will certainly be enough. 
I gave you a very small sheep.”

He leaned his head towards the drawing:

“Not so small… 
Look! 
He's fallen asleep…”

And that's how I made the acquaintance of the little prince. 

----NewFile----

Chapter III

It took me a long time to find out where he came from. 
The little prince, who asked me many questions, never seemed to hear the ones that I had.
It was the words spoken by chance that, little by little, revealed everything to me. 
So, when he saw my airplane for the first time (I won’t draw my airplane, it would be a drawing far too complicated for me), he asked me:

“What's that thing there?”

“It's not a thing. 
It flies. 
It's an airplane. 
It’s my airplane.”

And I was proud to have him know that I could fly. 
Then he cried:

“What? You fell from the sky!”

“Yes,” I said modestly.

“Oh! That's funny!…”

And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which irritated me very much. 
I prefer people to take my misfortunes seriously. 
Then he added:

“So, you also come from the sky! 
What planet are you from?”

Just then I spotted a glimmer of light in the mystery of his presence, and I asked abruptly:

“So you come from another planet then?”

But he didn’t answer me. 
He shook his head slowly while still looking at my airplane:

“Of course, on that thing, you can't have come from very far…”

And he drifted into a daydream which lasted a long while. 
Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket, he sank  into the contemplation of his treasure.

You can imagine how I had been intrigued by this small disclosure about ‘the other planets.’ 
So I tried to find out more:

“Where are you from, my little fellow? 
Where’s this home of yours? 
Where do you want to take my sheep off to?”

After a reflective silence he answered:

“What's good about the box you’ve given me is that at night, he can use it as a house.”

“That’s right. 
And if you’re good, I'll give you a rope to tie him up during the day. 
And a stake.”

The offer seemed to shock the little prince:

“Tie him up? 
What a strange idea!”

“But if you don't tie him up, he’ll wander off somewhere, and get lost.”

My friend broke into another peal of laughter:

“But where would you want him to go!”

“Anywhere. 
Straight ahead…”

Then the little prince said solemnly:

“That doesn’t matter; everything is so small, where I live.”

And perhaps with a hint of sadness, he added:

“Straight ahead you can't go very far…”

----NewFile----

Chapter IV

I had thus learned a second very important thing: |that his home planet was barely bigger than a house!

It didn't surprise me much. 
I knew that, apart from the large planets like the Earth, Jupiter, Mars, and Venus, which have been given names, |there are hundreds of others that are sometimes so small that one has great difficulty in spotting them through the telescope. 
When an astronomer discovers one of these, he gives it a number as a name. 
He names it for example “the asteroid 325.”

I have serious reasons to believe that the planet from where the little prince came is the asteroid B-612. 
This asteroid has only been seen through a telescope once, in 1909, by a Turkish astronomer.

He had then given a big presentation on his discovery at an international astronomy congress.
But nobody had believed him because of his outfit. 
Grown-ups are like that.

Fortunately for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator imposed on his people, on pain of death, that they dress in the European fashion. 
The astronomer gave his presentation again in 1920, in a very elegant suit.
And this time everybody shared his views.

If I have told you these details about the asteroid B-612, |and if I have revealed to you its number, it’s because of the grown-ups. 
Grown-ups love numbers. 
When you talk to them about a new friend, they never ask you about any of the important things. 
They never ask you: “How does his voice sound? 
What games does he like best? 
Does he collect butterflies?” 
They ask: “How old is he? 
How many brothers does he have?
How much does he weigh? 
How much money does his father make?” 
Only then do they think they know him. 
If you say to the grown-ups: |“I saw a beautiful pink brick house with geraniums by the windows and doves on the roof…,” |they aren't able to picture this house in their minds. 
You’d have to tell them: “I saw a one hundred thousand franc house.” 
And they’d exclaim: “How pretty!”

So if you say to them: |“The proof that the little prince existed is that he was charming, he laughed, and he wanted a sheep. 
When someone wants a sheep, that proves they exist,” |they will shrug their shoulders and treat you like a child. 
But if you say to them: “The planet he came from is the Asteroid B-612”, they will then be convinced, |and leave you in peace and spare you their questions. 
They’re like that. 
Don't be angry with them. 
Children should be very forgiving towards the grown-ups.

But, of course, those of us who understand life, we don't much care for numbers! 
I would have liked to begin this story in the same way as a fairy tale. 
I would have liked to say:

“Once upon a time, there was a little prince who lived on a planet not much bigger than himself, |and who needed a friend…” 
For those who understand life, it would have seemed much more real.

For I don’t want my book to be read lightly. 
I feel so much sadness in recounting these memories. 
It has already been six years since my friend left with his sheep. 
If I try to describe him here, it’s so as not to forget him. 
It’s sad to forget a friend. 
Not everyone has had a friend. 
And I could become like the grown-ups who are interested in nothing but numbers. 
It is then because of this too that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. 
It's hard to take up drawing again at my age, |when one has never made any attempt other than that of the closed boa, and that of the open boa, at the age of six! 
I'll try, of course, to make my portraits as lifelike as possible. 
But I'm not quite sure I'll succeed. 
One drawing goes well; another is no longer lifelike. 
I also get the size a bit wrong. 
Here the little prince is too big. 
There he’s too small. 
I’m also not sure about the colour of his outfit. 
So I fumble along somehow, as best I can. 
In the end, I will make mistakes on certain more important points too. 
But you’ll have to forgive me for that. 
My friend never gave explanations. 
Perhaps he thought I was just like him. 
But I, unfortunately, don't know how to see sheep through boxes. 
Perhaps I’m a bit like the grown-ups. 
I must have gotten older.

----NewFile----

Chapter V

Every day I learned something about his planet, about the departure, and about the trip. 
It came slowly, as his thoughts wandered. 
It was in this way that, on the third day, I came to know of the tragedy of the baobabs.

This time again it was thanks to the sheep, because the little prince asked me abruptly, as if seized by a grave doubt:

“It’s true, isn’t it, that sheep eat shrubs?”

“Yes. 
It's true.”

“Oh! I am glad!”

I didn’t understand why it was so important that sheep ate shrubs. 
But the little prince added:

“Then it follows they also eat baobabs?”

I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs are not shrubs, but trees as big as churches, |and that even if he took with him a whole herd of elephants, the herd wouldn't manage to finish up one single baobab.

The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh:

“They’d have to be piled up on top of each other…”

But he remarked wisely:

“The baobab trees, before they get bigger, they start off small.”

“That's right! 
But why do you want your sheep to eat the little baobabs?”

He replied: 
“Oh, come on!,” as if it were obvious. 
And it took me a great mental effort to understand this problem on my own.

And indeed, on the planet of the little prince there were, like on all planets, both good plants and bad plants. 
And therefore, both good seeds from good plants and bad seeds from bad plants. 
But seeds are invisible. 
They sleep in the secrecy of the earth until, on a whim, one of them decides to wake up. 
Then it elongates and grows, timidly at first, toward the sun: a charming little harmless sprig. 
If it’s a sprig of radish or rose bush, you can let it grow as it likes. 
But if it’s a bad plant, one must pull the plant out straight away, as soon as it can be recognised. 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet of the little prince… |there were the seeds of baobab trees. 
The soil of the planet was infested with them. 
A baobab, if you go about it too late, can never ever be gotten rid of. 
It takes over the entire planet. 
It pierces it with its roots. 
And if the planet is too small, and if there are too many baobabs, they shatter it to pieces.

“It's a matter of discipline,” the little prince told me later. 
“After grooming oneself in the morning, the planet must be carefully groomed. 
You must impose yourself regularly to pull up the baobabs as soon as they can be told apart from the rose bushes, |to which they look very similar when they are very young. 
It's a very boring job, but very easy.”

And one day he suggested that I apply myself to making a beautiful drawing, |to get this all into the heads of the children, where I lived.
“If one day they travel,” he said to me, “it could come in useful. 
Sometimes there’s no harm in postponing one's work. 
But in the case of baobabs, it's always a catastrophe. 
I used to know a planet inhabited by a lazy person. 
He had neglected three shrubs…”

And based on what the little prince told me, I drew this planet. 
I don’t at all like to sound like a moralist. 
But the danger of the baobabs is so little known, |and the risks run by he who gets lost on an asteroid are so great that, this one time, I am making an exception to my normal reserve. 
I say: “Children! 
Beware of baobabs!” 
It’s to warn my friends of a danger they've long been skirting, |as I have, without knowing it, that I have worked so hard on that drawing. 
The lesson I gave was worth the effort. 
You might be wondering: |Why is it that in this book there aren't any other drawings as impressive as the drawing of the baobabs? 
The answer is very simple: I tried but I wasn't able to succeed. 
When I drew the baobabs I was spurred on by a sense of urgency.

----NewFile----

Chapter VI

Oh! Little prince, in this way I came to understand, bit by bit, your little sad life. 
For a long time, your only entertainment was the softness of the sunsets. 
I learned this new detail on the fourth day, in the morning, when you said to me:

“I really like sunsets. 
Let’s go and see a sunset now…”

“But you have to wait…”

“Wait for what?”

“Wait until the sun goes down.”

You seemed very surprised at first, and then you laughed at yourself. 
And you said:

“I think myself at home still!”

Indeed. 
When it’s noon in the United States, the sun, as everybody knows, is setting over France. 
It would suffice to be able to go to France in one minute to be able see the sunset. 
Unfortunately, France is much too far away. 
But on your tiny planet, all you needed was to pull your chair a few steps. 
And you would watch the twilight every time you wanted…

“One day I saw the sun set forty-four times!”

And a little later you added:

“You know… when you’re so sad, you love sunsets…”

“The day with the forty-four times, were you really that sad then?”

But the little prince didn't reply.

----NewFile----

Chapter VII

On the fifth day, again thanks to the sheep, this secret of the little prince's life was revealed to me. 
He asked abruptly, without any prior indications, |as if it were the fruit of a question long pondered in silence:

“A sheep, if it eats shrubs, does it eat flowers too?”

“A sheep eats everything that it finds.”

“Even flowers that have thorns?”

“Yes. 
Even flowers that have thorns.”

“What are the thorns for then?”

I didn't know.
At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew an overtightened bolt in my engine. 
I was very worried, as my breakdown was beginning to seem very serious, |and the drinking water, that was running out, made me fear the worst.

“What are the thorns for?”

The little prince never let go of a question, once he had asked it. 
I was upset over the bolt and I answered just anything:

“The thorns are of no use at all; it's just pure meanness on the part of the flowers!”

“Oh!”

But after a moment of silence, he exclaimed with a kind of resentment:

“I don’t believe you! 
Flowers are weak. 
They’re naïve. 
They reassure themselves as best they can. 
They think themselves dreadful with their thorns…”

I made no reply. 
At that moment I was thinking to myself: |“If this bolt keeps resisting, I'll knock it out with the strike of hammer.” 
The little prince again interrupted my thoughts:

“And you actually believe that flowers—”

“No! 
No! 
I don’t believe any of it! 
I answered just anything.
I, myself, am busy with matters of consequence!”

He looked at me, stunned.

“Matters of consequence!”

He saw me, my hammer in hand and my fingers black with grease, leaning over an object that seemed to him very ugly.

“You talk just like the grown-ups!”

That made me rather ashamed. 
But, relentlessly, he continued:

“You confuse everything… you mix everything up!”

He was really very angry. 
He shook his golden curls in the breeze:

“I know a planet where there is a red-faced man. 
He has never smelled a flower. 
He has never looked at a star. 
He has never loved anyone. 
He has never done anything but sums. 
And all day long, like you, he repeats: ‘I am a man of consequence! I am a man of consequence!’ |And that makes him swell up with pride. 
But this is not a man, he’s a mushroom!”

“A what?”

“A mushroom!”

The little prince was now white with rage.

“Flowers have been producing thorns for millions of years. 
For millions of years, the sheep have eaten the flowers anyway. 
And it's not a matter of consequence to try to understand why they take so much trouble to produce thorns which are never of any use? 
Is the war of the flowers and the sheep not important? 
Is it not of more consequence and more important than the sums of a fat red-faced man? 
And if I myself know of a flower unique in the entire world, which is found nowhere but on my planet, |and that a little sheep can destroy with a single blow, just like that, one morning, without realising what he's doing, is that not important?”

He blushed, and continued:

“If someone loves a flower of which just one specimen exists amongst the millions and millions of stars, |it’s enough to make him happy when he looks at them. 
He can say: ‘My flower is out there somewhere…’ 
But if the sheep eats the flower, for him it’s as if suddenly all the stars had gone out! 
And that’s not important!?”

He couldn’t say anything more. 
He suddenly burst into tears. 
Night had fallen. 
I had put down my tools. 
I didn't care about my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death.
There was on a star, a planet, my planet, Earth, a little prince to be comforted! 
I took him in my arms. 
I rocked him. 
I said: “The flower that you love isn’t in danger… 
I’ll draw you a muzzle for your sheep… 
I'll draw you some armor for your flower… I…” 
I wasn't quite sure what to say. 
I felt very awkward. 
I didn’t know how to reach him, where to find him… 
It's so secretive, the land of tears.

----NewFile----
 
Chapter VIII

I very quickly learned to know this flower better. 
There had always been very simple flowers on the planet of the little prince, decorated with a single row of petals, |that didn't take up any space, and didn’t bother anyone. 
They would appear one morning in the grass, and in evening they’d fade away. 
But this one had sprouted one day, from a seed blown in from who knows where, |and the little prince had watched very closely this sprout that didn't look like the other sprouts. 
It could have been a new kind of baobab. 
But the shrub soon stopped growing and began to produce a flower. 
The little prince, who witnessed the appearance of a huge bud, felt clearly that a miraculous apparition must emerge from it, |but the flower never finished preparing for her future beauty, safe in her green chamber. 
She chose her colours carefully. 
She dressed slowly; she arranged her petals one by one. 
She did not want to come out all rumpled, like the poppies. 
She only wanted to appear in the full radiance of her beauty. 
Oh yes! 
She was a very flirtatious creature! 
Her mysterious adornment had thus lasted for days and days. 
Then it happened that one morning, exactly at sunrise, she had shown herself.

And, having worked with such precision, she said with a yawn:

“Oh! I have only just woken up… 
I do apologize… 
I am not yet presentable”

The little prince couldn’t contain his admiration:

“You’re so beautiful!”

“Am I not?” the flower responded, softly. 
“And I was born at the same moment as the sun…”

The little prince correctly guessed that she wasn't very modest, but how ravishing she was!

“It's time, I think, for breakfast,” she had soon added, |“If you would have the kindness to think of my needs…”

And the little prince, completely abashed, having gone to look for a sprinkling can of fresh water, tended to the flower.

And like that, she had soon tormented him with her vanity, which was somewhat delicate. 
One day, for example, whilst talking about her four thorns, she had told the little prince:

“Let them come, the tigers, with their claws!”

“There aren’t any tigers on my planet,” the little prince had objected, |“and tigers don’t eat grass.”

“I am not a grass,” the flower replied softly.

“Please forgive me…”

“I do not fear tigers, but I detest drafts. 
You wouldn't happen to have a screen?”

“Detests drafts… that’s bad luck for a plant,” the little prince had remarked. 
“This flower is very complicated…”

“In the evening you will put me under a dome. 
It is very cold where you live. 
It's poorly arranged. 
Where I come from…”

But she had interrupted herself. 
She had come in the form of a seed. 
She couldn’t have known anything of other worlds. 
Humiliated by having allowed herself to be caught fabricating such a naïve lie, |she had coughed two or three times to put the little prince in the wrong.

“The screen…?”

“I was going to look for it but you were talking to me!”

Then she forced a cough to impose on him remorse all the same.

So the little prince, despite the good will of his love, had soon come to doubt her. 
He had taken seriously words of no importance, and had become very unhappy.

“I shouldn’t have listened to her,” he told me one day, “you should never listen to the flowers. 
We must look at them and inhale their scent. 
Mine filled my planet with fragrance, but I didn’t know how to take pleasure in it. 
This business of the claws, which had annoyed me so much, should only have filled me with tenderness...”

He continued his confidences:

“Just then I didn't know how to understand! 
I should have judged her by her acts and not by her words. 
She enveloped me with her fragrance and light. 
I should never have run away! 
I should have guessed the tenderness behind her poor little stratagems. 
Flowers are so contradictory! 
But I was too young to know how to love her.”

----NewFile----

Chapter IX

I think that for his escape he took advantage of a migration of a flock of wild birds. 
On the morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order. 
He carefully swept out his active volcanoes. 
He owned two active volcanoes. 
It was very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning. 
He also owned an extinct volcano. 
But, as he used to say, “You never know!” 
So he swept out the extinct volcano, too. 
If they are well swept, volcanoes burn slowly and steadily, without any eruptions. 
Volcanic eruptions are like chimney fires. 
Of course, on our earth we’re much too small to sweep out our volcanoes. 
That’s why they cause us no end of trouble.

The little prince also pulled up, with a hint of sadness, the last baobab shoots. 
He thought he would never have to come back. 
But all these familiar tasks seemed to him, on that morning, very sweet. 
And when he watered the flower one last time, |and prepared to shelter her under her dome, he found himself close to tears.

“Goodbye,” he said to the flower.

But she didn’t answer.

“Goodbye,” he said again.

The flower coughed. 
But it was not because of her cold.

“I have been foolish,” she told him finally. 
“I ask your forgiveness. 
Try to be happy.”

He was surprised by the absence of reproaches. 
He stood there bewildered, the dome in mid-air. 
He didn’t understand this quiet sweetness.

“Of course I love you,” the flower said to him. 
“It’s my fault that you didn’t know. 
That is of no importance. 
But you have been just as foolish as I have. 
Try to be happy… 
Let the dome be. 
I do not want it anymore.”

“But the wind—”

“My cold is not all that bad… 
The cool night air will do me good. 
I am a flower.”

“But the animals—”

“I will have to endure two or three caterpillars if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies. 
It seems that they are very beautiful. 
And otherwise who will come to visit me? 
You will be far away. 
As for the large animals, I am not afraid of anything. 
I have my claws.”

And she naïvely showed her four thorns. 
Then she added:

“Don't linger like this, it’s tiresome. 
You have decided to leave. 
Now go!”

For she did not want him to see her crying. 
She was such a proud flower…

----NewFile----

Chapter X

He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. 
So he began by visiting them to seek an occupation and to learn. 

The first one was inhabited by a king. 
The king sat, dressed in purple and ermine, on a very simple, yet majestic, throne.

“Ah! Here is a subject,” exclaimed the king, when he caught sight of the little prince.

And the little prince asked himself:

“How could he recognise me when he’s never seen me before?”

He didn’t know that for Kings, the world is very much simplified. 
All men are subjects.

“Approach, so that I may see you better,” said the king, who was very proud to finally be king over somebody.

The little prince looked around for a place to sit, |but the planet was completely taken over by the magnificent ermine robe. 
So he remained standing, and, since he was tired, he yawned.

“It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king,” the monarch said to him. 
“I forbid you to do so.”

“I can't stop myself,” replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed. 
“I’ve come on a long journey, and I haven’t slept…”

“In that case,” the king told him, “I order you to yawn. 
I have not seen anyone yawning for years. 
Yawns, for me, are objects of curiosity. 
Come, now! Yawn again! 
It is an order.”

“That makes me shy… I can’t any more…” said the little prince, blushing.

“Hum! Hum!” replied the king. 
“Then I... I order you sometimes to yawn and sometimes to...”

He sputtered a bit, and seemed upset.

For the king fundamentally insisted that his authority be respected. 
He didn’t tolerate disobedience. 
He was an absolute monarch. 
But, because he was good at heart, he gave reasonable orders.

“If I ordered,” he would often say, “if I ordered a general to change himself into a seabird, |and if the general did not obey, it would not be the general’s fault. 
It would be my fault.”

“May I sit down?” the little prince enquired timidly.

“I order you to sit down,” replied the king, who majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle.

But the little prince was astonished. 
The planet was tiny. 
Over what could this king really rule?

“Sire... ,” he said to him, “excuse my asking you a question... ”

“I order you to ask me a question,” the king rushed to say.

“Sire… over what do you rule?”

“Over everything,” said the king, with a magnificent simplicity.

“Over everything?”

The king, with a subtle gesture, pointed out his planet, the other planets and the stars.

“Over all that?” asked the little prince.

“Over all that... ,” the king answered.

For he was not only an absolute monarch: he was a universal monarch.

“And the stars obey you?”

“Of course,” the king said. 
“They obey immediately. 
I do not tolerate insubordination.”

Such power filled the little prince with wonder. 
If he had held it himself, he would have been able to watch, not forty-four, but seventy-two, |or even a hundred, or even two hundred sunsets on the same day, |without ever having to move his chair! 
And as he felt a bit sad as he remembered his forsaken little planet, he plucked up his courage to ask the king a favour:

“I’d like to see a sunset… 
Do that for me… 
Order the sun to set…”

“If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, |or to write a tragic drama, or to change himself into a sea bird, |and if the general did not carry out the order received, which one of us would be in the wrong?”

“It would be you,” said the little prince firmly.

“Exactly. 
One must ask of each person that which they can give,” the king went on. 
“Authority is based, first and foremost, on reason. 
If you order your people to go and throw themselves into the sea, they will rise up in revolution. 
I have the right to demand obedience because my orders are reasonable.”

“Then my sunset?” the little prince reminded him, who never forgot a question once he had asked it.

“You shall have your sunset. 
I shall demand it. 
But I shall wait, according to my science of government, until the conditions are favourable.”

“When will that be?” inquired the little prince.

“Hum! hum!” replied the king, who first consulted a bulky almanac. |“Hum! Hum! That will be about... about... that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight. 
And you will see how well I am obeyed!”

The little prince yawned. 
He was sorry for his lost sunset. 
And then he was already getting a little bored.

“I have nothing more to do here,” he said to the king. 
“I’ll set off again.”

“Do not go,” said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. 
“Do not go. I will make you a Minister!”

“Minister of what?”

“Minster of... of Justice!”

“But there’s nobody to judge!”

“We do not know that,” the king said to him. 
“I have not yet gone all the way around my kingdom. 
I am very old; I have no space for a carriage and it tires me to walk.”

“Oh, but I’ve already seen!” said the little prince, |who leant over to give one more glance at the other side of the planet. 
“There is no one down there either… ”

“Then you shall judge yourself,” the king answered. 
“That is the most difficult thing of all. 
It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge someone else. 
If you succeed in judging yourself well, then you are truly a wise person.”

“I,” said the little prince, “I can judge myself anywhere. 
I don’t need to live here.”

“Hum! hum!” said the king. “I am fairly certain that somewhere on my planet there is an old rat. 
I hear him at night. 
You can judge this old rat. 
From time to time you will condemn him to death. 
Thus his life will depend on your justice. 
But you will pardon him on each occasion to conserve him. 
There is only one of him.”

“I,” replied the little prince, “don’t like to condemn anyone to death, and now I think I’ll leave.”

“No,” said the king.

But the little prince, having completed his preparations, had no wish to grieve the old monarch.

“If Your Majesty wished to be promptly obeyed, he could give me a reasonable order. 
He could order me, for example, to leave within a minute. 
It seems to me that the conditions are favourable…”

As the king had made no answer, the little prince at first hesitated, then, with a sigh, set off.

“I make you my Ambassador,” the king hurriedly cried out.

He had a magnificent air of authority.

“The grown-ups are very strange,” the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey.

----NewFile----

Chapter XI

The second planet was inhabited by a vain man.

“Ah! Here comes a visit from an admirer!”  |exclaimed the vain man from afar, the moment he spotted the little prince.

Because, to vain men, all other men are admirers.

“Good morning,” said the little prince. 
“You have a funny hat.”

“It’s for saluting,” the vain man replied. 
“It’s to raise in salute when people acclaim me. 
Unfortunately, nobody ever passes by this way.”

“Oh, really?” said the little prince, who didn’t understand.

“Clap your hands, one against the other,” the vain man advised.

The little prince clapped his hands, one against the other. 
The vain man raised his hat in a modest salute.

“This is more fun than the visit to the king,” the little prince said to himself. 
And he began again to clap his hands, one against the other. 
The vain man again raised his hat in a salute.

After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the monotony of the game: 

“And to make the hat come down,” he asked, “what should I do?”

But the vain man didn’t hear him. 
Vain people never hear anything but praise.

“Do you really admire me a lot?” he asked the little prince.

“What does that mean—'to admire'?”

“‘To admire’ means ‘to recognise that I’m the most handsome, the best-dressed, the richest, and the most intelligent person on the planet.’”

“But you’re the only person on your planet!”

“Do it for me. 
Admire me anyway.”

“I admire you,” said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders a little, |“but how can that be so important to you?”

And the little prince went away.

“The grown-ups are certainly very odd,” he said to himself during his journey.

----NewFile----

Chapter XII

The next planet was inhabited by a drunkard. 
This was a very short visit, but it plunged the little prince into a profound sadness.

“What are you doing here?” he said to the drunkard, |who he found sat in silence in front of a collection of empty bottles and a collection of full bottles.

“I’m drinking,” replied the drunkard, gloomily.

“Why are you drinking?” the little prince asked him.

“To forget,” replied the drunkard.

“To forget what?” asked the little prince, who already felt sorry for him.

“To forget that I’m ashamed,” confessed the drunkard, lowering his head.

“Ashamed of what?” inquired the little prince, who wanted to help him.

“Ashamed of drinking!” concluded the drunkard, who then shut himself in silence for good.

And the little prince went away, puzzled.

“The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd,” he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.

----NewFile----

Chapter XIII

The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. 
This man was so busy that he didn’t even raise his head when the little prince arrived.

“Good morning,” he said to him. 
“Your cigarette has gone out.”

“Three and two make five. 
Five and seven make twelve. 
Twelve and three make fifteen. 
Good morning. 
Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. 
Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. 
No time to light it again. 
Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. 
Phew! 
Then that makes five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one.”

“Five hundred million what?”

“Huh? 
Are you still here? 
Five-hundred-and-one million… I don't know anymore… 
I have so much work! 
I am a man of consequence, I don’t amuse myself with balderdash! 
Two and five make seven…”

“Five-hundred-and-one million what?” |repeated the little prince, who had never in his life let go of a question, once he had asked it.

The businessman raised his head.

“During the fifty-four years that I’ve lived on this planet, I’ve only been disturbed three times. 
The first time was twenty-two years ago, by some noisybug who fell from God-knows-where. 
He made the most dreadful noise, and I made four mistakes in a sum. 
The second time was eleven years ago, by an attack of rheumatism. 
I don't get enough exercise. 
I don’t have time to stroll about. 
I am a man of consequence. 
The third time... well, this is it! 
I was saying, then, five-hundred-and-one million... ”

“Million what?”

The businessman realised that there was no hope of peace:

“Millions of those little things that you see in the sky sometimes.”

“Flies?”

“No, no, the little things that shine.”

“Bees?”
 
“No, no! 
The little golden things that make lazy men daydream. 
But I am a man of consequence! 
I have no time to daydream.”

“Ah! The stars?”

“Yes, that's it. 
The stars.”

“And what do you do with five-hundred million stars?”

“Five hundred and one million, six hundred twenty two thousand, seven hundred and thirty one. 
I am a man of consequence: I am precise.”

“And what do you do with these stars?”

“What do I do with them?”

“Yes.”

“Nothing. 
I own them.”

“You own the stars?”

“Yes.”

“But I’ve already seen a king who—”

“Kings do not own. 
They ‘reign’ over. 
It's very different.”

“And of what use is it to you to own the stars?”

“It's use is to make me rich.”

“And of what use is it to you to be rich?”

“To buy more stars, if someone discovers some more.”

“This man,” the little prince said to himself, “reasons a bit like my poor drunkard.”

Yet he asked some more questions:

“How can you own the stars?”

“Whose are they?” the businessman retorted, grumpily.

“I don't know. 
Nobody's.”

“Then they are mine, because I thought of it first.”

“Is that enough?”

“Certainly. 
When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it’s yours. 
When you discover an island that belongs to nobody, it’s yours. 
When you have an idea first, you take out a patent: it’s yours. 
And I own the stars, because no one before me ever thought of owning them.”

“Yes, that’s true,” said the little prince. 
“And what do you do with them?”

“I administer them. 
I count and recount them,” said the businessman. 
“It’s difficult. 
But I am a man of consequence.”

The little prince was still not satisfied.

“If I own a scarf, I can put it around my neck and take it away with me. 
If I own a flower, I can pick my flower and take it away with me. 
But you can’t pick the stars.”

“No. But I can put them in the bank.”

“What does that mean?”

“That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. 
And then I lock that paper in a drawer.”

“And that’s all?”

“That’s enough!”

“That’s funny,” thought the little prince. 
“It’s rather poetic. 
But it’s of no great consequence.”

The little prince had, on matters of consequence, ideas which were very different from the ideas of the grown-ups.

“I myself,” he continued, “own a flower that I water every day. 
I own three volcanoes that I sweep out every week.
Because I also sweep out the one that is extinct. 
You never know. 
It’s good for my volcanoes, and it’s good for my flower, that I own them. 
But you’re of no use to the stars…”

The businessman opened his mouth, but found nothing to say in response, and the little prince went away.

“The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary,” |he said to himself plainly during the journey.

----NewFile----

Chapter XIV

The fifth planet was very strange. 
It was the smallest of them all. 
There was just enough room on it to accommodate a street lamp and a lamplighter. 
The little prince couldn't figure out the purpose of having, somewhere out in the sky, on a planet with neither houses nor any people, a street lamp and a lamplighter. 
He said to himself nevertheless:

“It may well be that this man is absurd. 
But, he’s less absurd than the king, than the vain man, than the businessman, and than the drunkard. 
At least his work has a meaning. 
When he lights his lamp, it’s as if he’s bringing to life one more star, or a flower. 
When he puts out his lamp, it puts the flower, or the star, to sleep. 
It's a very nice occupation.
It serves a real purpose, because it’s pretty.”

When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter.

“Good morning. 
Why have you just put out your lamp?”

“Those are the orders,” replied the lamplighter. 
“Good morning.”

“What are the orders?”

“That I put out my lamp. 
Good evening.”

And he lit it again.

“But why have you just lit it again?”

“Those are the orders,” replied the lamplighter.

“I don’t understand,” said the little prince.

“There’s nothing to understand,” said the lamplighter. 
“Orders are orders. 
Good morning.”

And he put out his lamp.

Then he wiped his forehead with a handkerchief with red squares.

“I have a terrible profession here. 
Before it used to be reasonable. 
I’d put it out in the morning, and in the evening I’d light it. 
I had the rest of the day to rest, and the rest of the night to sleep...”

“And since then, have the orders changed?”

“The orders haven’t changed,” said the lamplighter. 
“That’s the tragedy! 
Every year the planet has turned faster and faster, and the orders haven’t changed!”

“So what?” said the little prince.

“So now that it spins round once every minute, I no longer have a seconds’s rest. 
I light it and put it out once every minute!”

“That’s funny! 
Where you live, a day only lasts a minute!”

“It’s not funny at all!” said the lamplighter. 
“We’ve already been speaking for a month.”

“A month?”

“Yes. 
Thirty minutes. 
Thirty days. 
Good evening.”

And he lit his lamp again.

The little prince watched him and felt he loved this lamplighter who was so faithful to his orders. 
He remembered the sunsets which he himself went to seek in the past, by moving his chair. 
He wanted to help his friend.

“You know... I know a way that you can rest whenever you want…”

“I always want to,” said the lamplighter.

For it is possible to be both faithful and lazy at the same time.

The little prince went on:

“Your planet is so small that you can go right round it in three strides. 
You only have to walk along rather slowly to always stay in the sun. 
When you want to rest, you can walk— and the day will last however long you want.”

“That doesn't help me much,” said the lamplighter. 
“What I really love in life is to sleep.”

“That’s bad luck,” said the little prince.

“That’s bad luck,” said the lamplighter. 
“Good morning.”

And he put out his lamp.

“That man,” the little prince said to himself, as he continued further on his journey, |“that man would be looked down on by all the others: by the king, by the vain man, by the drunkard, and by the businessman. 
Yet he’s the only one that doesn’t seem ridiculous to me. 
It’s perhaps because he cares for something other than himself.”

He breathed a sigh of regret, and continued to himself:

“That man is the only one with who I could have made friends. 
But his planet is really very small. 
There’s no room on it for two people…”

What the little prince didn’t dare admit to himself was that he missed this blessed planet, most of all, because of the 1440 sunsets every twenty-four hours!

----NewFile----

Chapter XV

The sixth planet was ten times bigger. 
It was inhabited by an old man who wrote enormous books. 

“Oh, look! Here comes an explorer!” he cried out when he caught sight of the little prince.

The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. 
He had already traveled so much!

“Where do you come from?” the old man said to him.

“What is that big book?” said the little prince. 
“What do you do here?”

“I am a geographer,” said the old man.

“What’s a geographer?”

“He is a scholar who knows where the seas, the rivers, the towns, the mountains, and the deserts are found.”

“That’s very interesting,” said the little prince. 
“That really is, at last, a real profession!”

And he glanced around at the planet of the geographer. 
He had never seen such a majestic planet before.

“It's really beautiful, your planet.” 
“Are there oceans?”

“I have no way of knowing,” said the geographer.

“Oh.” 
(The little prince was disappointed.) 
“And mountains?”

“I have no way of knowing,” said the geographer.

“And towns, and rivers, and deserts?”

“I have no way of knowing that, either,” said the geographer.

“But you’re a geographer!”

“That’s true,” the geographer said, “but I am not an explorer. 
I have not a single explorer. 
It is not for the geographer to count the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. 
The geographer is too important to go strolling about. 
He doesn’t leave his desk. 
But he receives the explorers. 
He asks them questions, and he writes down their recollections. 
And if the recollections of one of them appear interesting to him, the geographer does an inquiry into that explorer's moral character.”

“Why’s that?”

“Because an explorer who told lies would bring about catastrophe in geography books. 
So would an explorer who drank too much.”

“Why’s that?” said the little prince.

“Because drunkards see double. 
So the geographer would record two mountains in a place where there was only one.”

“I know someone,” said the little prince, “who would make a bad explorer.”

“That’s possible. 
So, when the moral character of the explorer appears to be in order, an inquiry is done into his discovery.”

“You go to see it?”

“No. 
That's too complicated. 
But one requires of the explorer that he provide proof. 
If for example, the discovery in question was of a large mountain, one would require that he bring back large stones from it.”

The geographer suddenly became excited.

“But you—you come from far away! 
You are an explorer! 
You must describe your planet to me!”

And the geographer, having opened his register, sharpened his pencil. 
The accounts of explorers are first recorded in pencil. 
One waits until the explorer has provided proof before recording them in ink.

“Well?” asked the geographer.

“Oh, where I live,” said the little prince, “it’s not very interesting, everything is very small. 
I have three volcanoes. 
Two active volcanoes, and one extinct one. 
But you never know.”

“One never knows,” said the geographer.

“I also have a flower.”

“We do not record flowers,” said the geographer.

“Why’s that? That’s the prettiest thing!”

“Because flowers are ephemeral.”

“What does that mean — 'ephemeral'?”

“Geography books,” said the geographer, “of all books, are of the greatest consequence. 
They never become out-dated. 
It is very rare that a mountain changes position. 
It is very rare that an ocean loses its water. 
We write about eternal things.”

“But extinct volcanoes can wake up,” interrupted the little prince. 
“What does 'ephemeral' mean?”

“Whether volcanoes are extinct or active, it's all the same to us,” said the geographer. 
“The thing that matters to us is the mountain. 
It does not change.”

“But what does 'ephemeral' mean?” |repeated the little prince, who had never in his life let go of a question, once he had asked it.

“It means, ‘which is at risk of imminent disappearance.’“

“Is my flower at risk of imminent disappearance?”

“Of course.”

“My flower is ephemeral,” the little prince said to himself, |“and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world. 
And I’ve left her all alone back home!”

That was his first stir of regret. 
But he took heart once again:

“What place would you advise me to visit?” he asked.

“The planet Earth,” replied the geographer. 
“It has a good reputation…”

And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower.

----NewFile----

Chapter XVI

So the seventh planet was the Earth.

The Earth isn't just any planet! 
It has one hundred and eleven kings (not forgetting, of course, the Negro kings amongst them), |seven thousand geographers, nine hundred thousand businessmen, seven and a half million drunkards, three hundred and eleven million vain men, |that’s to say, about two billion grown-ups.

To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, |I’ll tell you that before the invention of electricity it was necessary to maintain, over the span of the six continents, |a veritable army of four hundred and sixty two thousand five hundred and eleven streetlamp lighters.

Seen from a distance it made a wonderful spectacle. 
The movements of this army were regulated like those of an opera ballet. 
First came the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand and Australia. 
Having lit their lanterns, they would go off to bed. 
Then came the turn of the lamplighters of China and Siberia to enter into the dance. 
Then they too would disappear into the wings. 
Then came the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies. 
Then those of Africa and Europe. 
Then those of South America. 
Then those of North America. 
And never would they make a mistake in their order of entry on stage. 
It was magnificent.

Only the lamp lighter of the single lamp of the North pole, and his colleague at the single lamp of the South pole led lives of leisure: |they worked twice a year.

----NewFile----

Chapter XVII

When one wants to be witty, sometimes one bends the truth a little. 
I haven’t been very honest in telling you about the lamplighters. 
I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who aren't familiar with it. 
Men take up very little space on the Earth. 
If the two billion people who inhabit the Earth were to stand and squeeze together a little, like for a meeting, |they would easily fit on one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. 
All humanity could be piled up on the smallest Pacific islet.

The grown-ups, of course, won’t believe you. 
They picture themselves as taking up a lot of space. 
They think themselves as important as the baobabs. 
Therefore you will advise them to do the calculation. 
They adore numbers; that will please them. 
But don’t waste your time on this chore. 
It's pointless. 
You trust me.

Once on Earth, the little prince was thus very surprised not to see anyone. 
He was already worried that he’d got the wrong planet, when a moon-coloured coil stirred in the sand.

“Good evening,” said the little prince, just in case.

“Good evening,” said the snake.

“On what planet have I come down on?” asked the little prince.

“Onto Earth, in Africa,” the snake answered.

“Oh!... So there’s no one on Earth?”

“This is the desert. 
There is no one in the deserts. 
The Earth is big,” said the snake.

The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky.

“I wonder,” he said, “if the stars are lit so that each of us can one day find his own again. 
Look at my planet. 
It’s right there above us… But it’s so far away!”

“It is beautiful,” said the snake. 
“What have you come to do here?”

“I’ve have problems with a flower,” said the little prince.

“Ah!” said the snake.

And they fell silent.

“Where are the men?” continued the little prince at last. 
“It’s a bit lonely in the desert…”

“It is also lonely among men,” the snake said.

The little prince gazed at him for a long while.

“You're a funny creature,” he said finally, “as thin as a finger…”

“But I am more powerful than the finger of a king,” said the snake.

The little prince smiled.

“You aren't very powerful… you haven't even got any legs… you can’t even travel…”

“I can carry you farther than a ship,” said the snake.

He wrapped himself around the little prince's ankle, like a golden bracelet.

“Whoever I touch, I return them to the earth from which they came,” he added. 
“But you are pure, and you come from a star…”

The little prince made no reply.

“I feel sorry for you, so weak, on this Earth made of granite. 
I can help you if someday you miss your planet too much. 
I can…”

“Oh! I understood very well,” said the little prince, “but why do you always speak in riddles?”

“I solve them all,” said the snake.

And they fell silent.

----NewFile----

Chapter XVIII

The little prince crossed the desert and only came across a single flower. 
A flower with three petals, a simple flower of little interest.

“Hello,” said the little prince.

“Hello,” said the flower.

“Where are the men?” the little prince asked politely.

The flower had once seen a caravan passing.

“Men? 
I think there are six or seven of them. 
I saw them years ago. 
But you never know where to find them. 
They are blown here and there by the wind. 
They lack roots, it causes them a lot of bother.”

“Goodbye,” said the little prince.

“Goodbye,” said the flower.

----NewFile----

Chapter XIX

The little prince climbed a high mountain. 
The only mountains he’d ever known were the three volcanoes that came up to his knees. 
And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. 
“From a mountain as high as this one,” he said to himself, “I’ll be able to see the entire planet all at once, and all the people…” 
But he saw nothing but sharp needles of rock.

“Good morning,” he said, just in case.

“Good morning… Good morning… Good morning…,” answered the echo.

“Who are you?” said the little prince.

“Who are you… who are you… who are you...” answered the echo.

“Be my friends. I’m all alone,” he said.

“I’m all alone… all alone… all alone…,” answered the echo.

“What a funny planet!” he thought. 
“It’s all very dry, and very jagged, and very salty. 
And the men lack imagination. 
They repeat whatever you say to them… 
On my planet I had a flower: she was always the first to speak…”

----NewFile----

Chapter XX

But it happened that the little prince, having walked for a long time through the sands, the rocks, and the snow, at last discovered a road. 
And all roads lead to the dwellings of men.

“Good morning,” he said.

It was a garden covered in roses.

“Good morning,” said the roses.

The little prince looked at them. 
They all looked just like his flower.

“Who are you?” he asked them, astounded.

“We are roses,” the roses said.

“Oh!” said the little prince…

And he then felt very unhappy. 
His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind in the universe. 
And here were five thousand of them, all alike, in a single garden!

“She’d be very upset,” he said to himself,  “if she saw this… |she’d cough tremendously and pretend to die to avoid the ridicule. 
And I would have to pretend to nurse her, |because otherwise, to humble me too, she really would allow herself to die…”

He continued to himself: “I considered myself rich, with a flower that was one of a kind, |and all I have is a common rose. 
That, and my three volcanoes that come up to my knees, of which one is perhaps forever extinct; |that doesn't make me a very great prince…” 
And lying in the grass, he cried.

----NewFile----

Chapter XXI

It was then that the fox appeared:

“Good morning,” said the fox.

“Good morning,” responded the little prince politely, who turned around, but saw nothing.

“I’m right here,” the voice said, “under the apple tree…”

“Who are you?” asked the little prince. 
“You’re very pretty.”

“I’m a fox,” the fox said.

“Come and play with me,” proposed the little prince. 
“I’m so unhappy... ”

“I can’t play with you,” said the fox. 
“I am not tamed.”

“Oh! I’m sorry,” said the little prince.

But after some thought, he added:

“What does it mean—'to tame'?”

“You aren’t from here,” said the fox. “What are you looking for?”

“I’m looking for the men,” said the little prince. 
“What does 'to tame' mean?”

“Men,” said the fox, “they have rifles, and they hunt. 
It’s very bothersome. 
They also raise chickens. 
It’s their sole interest. 
Are you looking for chickens?”

“No,” said the little prince. 
“I am looking for friends. 
What does 'to tame' mean?”

“It’s something that’s too often forgotten,” said the fox. 
“It means ‘to establish bonds.’”

“‘To establish bonds?’”

“Of course,” said the fox. 
“To me, you’re still only a little boy, just like a hundred thousand other little boys. 
And I don’t need you. 
And you don’t need me either. 
To you, I’m only a fox, just like a hundred thousand other foxes. 
But if you tame me, we’ll need one another. 
To me, you’ll be unique in the entire world. 
To you, I’ll be unique in the entire world… ”

“I’m starting to understand,” said the little prince. 
“There’s a flower… I think she’s tamed me…”

“It’s possible,” said the fox. 
“On Earth you see all kinds of things.”

“Oh, but she’s not on Earth!” said the little prince.

The fox seemed very intrigued:

“On another planet?”

“Yes.”

“Are there hunters on that planet?”

“No.”

“That really is interesting! 
And chickens?”

“No.”

“Nothing is perfect,” sighed the fox.

But the fox came back to his idea.

“My life is monotonous. 
I hunt chickens, men hunt me. 
All the chickens look alike, and all the men look alike. 
So I get a bit bored. 
But if you tame me, it would bring some sunlight into my life. 
I’ll come to know a sound of footsteps that will be different from all the others. 
Other footsteps make me go back underground. 
Yours will call me out of my burrow like music. 
And then look! 
You see the wheat fields down there? 
I don’t eat bread. 
Wheat is of no use to me. 
The wheat fields don't remind me of anything. And that’s sad. 
But you have hair the colour of gold. 
So it’ll be wonderful when you’ve tamed me! 
The wheat, which is golden, will remind me of you. 
And I’ll love the sound of the wind in the wheat…”

The fox fell silent and gazed at the little prince for a long while.

“Please… tame me!” he said.

“I really want to,” the little prince replied, “but I don’t have a lot of time. 
I have friends to discover, and many things to understand.”

“One only understands the things that one tames,” said the fox. 
“Men no longer have the time to get to know anything. 
They buy things ready made in the shops. 
But as there aren’t any shopkeepers that sell friends, men no longer have any friends. 
If you want a friend, tame me!”

“What should I do?” asked the little prince.

“You have to be very patient,” replied the fox. 
“First you’ll sit down a bit far away from me, like this, in the grass. 
I’ll watch you out of the corner of my eye and you won’t say anything. 
Words are a source of misunderstandings. 
But, every day, you’ll be able to sit a little closer…”

The next day the little prince came back.

“It would’ve been better to come back at the same time of day,” said the fox. 
“If you come, for example, at four o'clock in the afternoon, from three o'clock I’d start to feel happy. 
As time went on, I’d feel happier and happier. 
Already by four o'clock, I’d be jumping about and getting restless; I’d discover the price of happiness! 
But if you come at just any time, I‘ll never know at what time my heart should be ready to greet you… |we must have rites…”

“What’s a rite?” asked the little prince.

“They are also something too often forgotten,” said the fox. 
“They are what make one day different from other days, one hour different from other hours. 
There’s a rite, for example, among my hunters. 
On Thursdays they dance with the girls of the village. 
So Thursday is a wonderful day! 
I go walking as far as the vineyards. 
If the hunters danced just whenever, all the days would be alike, |and I’d never have any holiday.”

Thus the little prince tamed the fox. 
And when the time to leave drew near:

“Oh,” said the fox, “I’ll cry.”

“It’s your fault,” said the little prince, |“I never wished you any harm, but you wanted me to tame you…”

“Of course,” said the fox.

“But you’re going to cry!” said the little prince.

“Of course,” said the fox.

“So you've gained nothing from this!”

“I have gained something,” said the fox, “because of the colour of the wheat.”

And then he added:

“Go and see the roses again. 
You’ll understand that yours is unique in the entire world. 
Then you'll come back to say goodbye to me, and I’ll give you a secret as a present.”

The little prince went away to see the roses again:

“You aren’t like my rose at all, you are nothing yet,” he told them. 
No one has tamed you, and you haven’t tamed anyone. 
You’re like my fox used to be. 
He was only a fox, just like a hundred thousand others. 
But I’ve made him my friend, and now he’s unique in the entire world.”

And the roses were very embarrassed.

“You are beautiful, but you are empty,” he continued to them. 
“One could not die for you. 
Of course, an ordinary passer-by would think that my rose looked just like you. 
But she alone is more important than all of you; because it’s her that I watered.
Because it’s her that I put under the glass dome.
Because it’s her that I sheltered with the screen. 
Because it’s her caterpillars that I killed (except two or three, to become butterflies).
Because it’s her that I listened to complain, or boast, or even sometimes when she said nothing. 
Because she’s my rose.”

And he went back to the fox:

“Goodbye... ,” he said.

“Goodbye,” said the fox. 
“Here's my secret. 
It’s very simple: one only sees clearly with the heart. 
What is essential is invisible to the eye.”

“What is essential is invisible to the eye,” repeated the little prince, so as to remember.

“It is the time you have lost for your rose that makes your rose so important.”

“It is the time I have lost for my rose…” said the little prince, so as to remember.

“The men have forgotten this truth,” said the fox. 
“But you must not forget it. 
You become forever responsible for that which you have tamed. 
You are responsible for your rose…”

“I am responsible for my rose,” repeated the little prince, so as to remember.

----NewFile----

Chapter XXII

“Good morning,” said the little prince.

“Good morning,” said the switchman.

“What are you doing here?” the little prince asked.

“I sort travelers, in bundles of a thousand,” said the switchman. 
“I dispatch the trains that carry them, sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left.”

And a brilliantly lit express, rumbling like thunder, shook the switchman's cabin.

“They really are in a hurry,” said the little prince. 
“What are they looking for?”

“Not even the locomotive engineer knows that,” said the switchman.

A second brilliantly lit express thundered by in the opposite direction.

“Are they already coming back?” asked the little prince.

“These aren’t the same ones,” said the switchman. 
“It’s an exchange.”

“Weren’t they happy, where they were?”

“No one is ever happy where they are,” said the switchman.

And the thunder of a third lit express rumbled.

“Are they pursuing the first travelers?” asked the little prince.

“They aren’t pursuing anything at all,” said the switchman. 
“They’re asleep in there, or if not, they’re yawning. 
Only the children are squashing their noses against the windowpanes.”

“Only the children know what they’re looking for,” said the little prince. 
“They loose their time over a rag doll and it becomes very important to them; |and if someone takes it away from them, they cry…”

“They’re lucky,” said the switchman.

----NewFile----

Chapter XXIII

“Good morning,” said the little prince.

“Good morning,” said the merchant. 

It was a seller of sophisticated pills that quench thirst. 
You take one a week, and you no longer feel the need to drink.

“Why do you sell that?” said the little prince.

“It’s a great time saving,” said the merchant. 
“Experts have done calculations. 
You save fifty-three minutes per week.”

“And what do I do with the fifty-three minutes?”

“You can do anything you like with them…”

“Myself,” the little prince said to himself, “if I had fifty-three minutes to spend, I’d walk very slowly toward a spring... ”

----NewFile----

Chapter XXIV

We were at the eighth day of my breakdown in the desert, |and I’d listened to the story of the merchant as I drank the last drop of my water supply.

“Ah,” I said to the little prince, “these memories of yours are very nice; |but I haven’t repaired my plane yet, I have nothing left to drink, |and I too, would be happy if I could walk very slowly towards a spring!”

“My friend the fox—” he said to me.

“My little fellow, this has nothing to do with the fox!”

“Why not?”

“Because we will die of thirst…”

He didn’t follow my reasoning, and he answered:

“It’s good to have had a friend, even if you're going to die. 
Myself, I’m glad to have had a fox as a friend…”

“He doesn't consider the danger,” I said to myself. 
“He’s never hungry or thirsty. 
A little sunshine is all he needs…”

But he looked at me and replied to my thought:

“I’m also thirsty... Let’s look for a well…”

I made a gesture of weariness: |it’s absurd to look for a well, at random, in the immensity of the desert. 
Nevertheless we set off.

When we had walked for hours in silence, night fell, and the stars began to shine. 
I saw them as if in a dream, as I had a bit of fever, due to my thirst. 
The little prince's words danced in my memory:

“So you’re also thirsty?” I asked him.

But he didn’t reply to my question. 
He said simply:

“Water can also be good for the heart…”

I didn’t understand his answer, but I said nothing. 
I knew well that I shouldn't press my questions.

He was tired. 
He sat down. 
I sat down beside him. 
And, after a silence, he spoke again:

“The stars are beautiful because of a flower that can’t be seen... ”

I replied “of course.” And I looked, without saying anything, at the folds of sand in the moonlight.

“The desert is beautiful,” he added.

And it was true. 
I have always loved the desert. 
You sit down on a sand dune. 
You see nothing. 
You hear nothing. 
And yet something radiates forth in silence…

“What makes the desert beautiful,” said the little prince, “is that somewhere it hides a well…”

I was surprised to suddenly understand this mysterious radiation of the sands. 
When I was a little boy I lived in an old house, |and legend told that a treasure was buried there. 
Of course, no one had ever been able to find it, or perhaps had even looked for it. 
But it cast an enchantment over that house. 
My house was hiding a secret in the depths of its heart…

“Yes,” I said to the little prince. “Whether it's the house, the stars, or the desert, that which gives them their beauty is invisible!”

“I’m glad,” he said, “that you agree with my fox.”

As the little prince was falling asleep, I took him in my arms and set out walking again. 
I felt deeply moved. 
It seemed that I was carrying a fragile treasure. 
It even seemed that there was nothing more fragile on Earth. 
I looked in the moonlight at his pale forehead, his closed eyes, his locks of hair that trembled in the wind, and I said to myself: 
“What I see there is only a shell. 
That which is most important is invisible…”

As his slightly parted lips traced a half-smile, I continued: |“What I find so deeply moving about this little sleeping prince is his loyaty to a flower; |it’s the image of a rose that shines in him like the flame of a lamp, even when he’s sleeping…” 
And I perceived him as even more fragile. 
One has to protect lamps well: a gust of wind can put them out…

And, walking like this, I found the well at daybreak.

----NewFile----

Chapter XXV

“Men,” said the little prince, “squeeze themselves into express trains, |but they no longer know what they are looking for. 
So they rush about, and go round in circles…”

And he added:

“It’s not worth it…”

The well that we had reached wasn’t like the wells of the Sahara. 
The wells of the Sahara are mere holes dug in the sand. 
This one looked like a village well. 
But there was no village there, and I thought I was dreaming.

“It’s strange,” I said to the little prince, “Everything’sis ready: the pulley, the bucket, and the rope…”

He laughed, took the rope, and put the pulley to work. 

And the pulley groaned like an old weathervane, when the wind has slept for a long time.

“Can you hear that?” said the little prince, “We’re waking up the well, and it’s singing…”

I didn’t want him to strain himself. 

“Let me do it,” I said, “It’s too heavy for you.”

I hoisted the bucket slowly to the edge of the well.
There I set it down good and level.
The song of the pulley carried on in my ears, |and in the still trembling water I could see the sun shaking.

“I’m thirsty for this water,” said the little prince. “Give me some to drink…”

And I understood what he had been looking for!

I raised the bucket to his lips. 
He drank, his eyes closed. 
It was as sweet as a festival. 
This water was very different from a nutriment. 
It was born of the walk under the stars, of the singing of the pulley, of the effort of my arms. 
It was good for the heart, like a present. 
When I was a little boy, the lights of the Christmas tree, the music of the Midnight Mass, |the tenderness in the smiles produced, in a similar way, the radiance of the gift that I received.

“The men where you live,” said the little prince, “grow five thousand roses in a single garden… |and they don’t find what they’re looking for there.”

“They don’t find it,” I replied.

“And yet what they’re looking for could be found in a single rose, or a little water …” 

“Of course,” I said.

And the little prince added:

“But the eyes are blind. 
You have to search with the heart…”

I had drunk the water. 
I breathed easily. 
Sand, at sunrise, is the color of honey. 
I was also glad of this honey color. 
Why did I have to have this feeling of grief…

“You have to keep your promise,” said the little prince softly, who had again sat down beside me.

“What promise?”

“You know… a muzzle for my sheep… I’m responsible for this flower…”

I took my sketches out of my pocket. 
The little prince saw them, and laughed as he said:

“Your baobabs – they look a bit like cabbages.”

“Oh!”

And I’d been so proud of my baobabs!

“Your fox… his ears… they look a bit like horns… and they’re too long!” 

And he laughed again.

“You are being unfair, my little fellow, |I didn't know how to draw anything except closed boas and open boas.”

“Oh, it’ll be all ok,” he said, “children understand.”

So I made a pencil sketch of a muzzle. 
And I felt a pang in my heart as I gave it to him.

“You have plans that I don’t know about…”

But he didn’t respond. 
He said to me:

“You know, my descent to Earth… tomorrow will be its anniversary.”

Then after a silence he went on:

“I came down very near here.”

And he blushed.

And once again, without understanding why, I felt a peculiar sense of sorrow. 
One question occurred to me however:

“So it wasn’t by chance that the morning I met you, eight days ago, you were out walking like that, |all alone, a thousand miles from any inhabited region? 
You were going back to the point of your descent?”

The little prince blushed again.

And I added, hesitantly:

“Perhaps because of the anniversary…?”

The little prince blushed once more. 
He never answered questions, but when one blushes, that means ‘yes,’ doesn’t it?

“Oh,” I said to him, “I’m afraid...”

But he responded:

“Now you must work. 
You must go back to your machine. 
I’ll wait for you here. 
Come back tomorrow evening…”

But I wasn’t reassured. 
I remembered the fox. 
One runs the risk of weeping a little, if one allows oneself to be tamed…

----NewFile----

Chapter XXVI

There was, next to the well, the ruin of an old stone wall. 
When I came back from my work, the next evening, I spotted from a distance my little price sitting on top of it, his feet hanging down. 
And I heard him say:

“Don’t you remember then?” he said. 
“It's not quite here!”

Another voice without doubt answered him, because he replied:

“Yes, yes! It’s the right day, but this isn’t the right place.”

I continued my walk towards the wall. 
I still didn’t see or hear anyone. 
Yet the little prince replied again:

“…Of course. 
You’ll see where my tracks begin in the sand. 
You just have to wait for me there. 
I’ll be there tonight…”

I was twenty meters from the wall, and I still saw nothing.

The little prince spoke again, after a pause:

“Do you have good poison? 
Are you sure you won’t make me suffer for long?”

I halted, my heart skipped a beat; but I still didn’t understand.

“Now go away,” he said, “I want to come back down!”

So I then brought my eyes down to the foot of the wall, and I leapt up! 
It was right there, raised up towards the little prince, one of those yellow snakes that kills you in thirty seconds. 
Even as I dug around in my pocked to take out my revolver, I started to run. |But, at the noise I made, the snake let himself flow easily across the sand, like the dying spray of a fountain, |and without hurrying too much, slipped between the stones with a light metallic sound.

I reached the wall just in time to catch my little fellow, my prince, in my arms, pale as snow.

“What’s going on here? 
So now you talk with snakes!”

I had loosened his eternal golden muffler. 
I had moistened his temples and made him drink. 
And now I didn’t dare ask him anything more. 
He looked at me gravely and put his arms around my neck. 
I felt his heart beat like that of a dying bird, when it has been shot with a rifle. 
He said to me:

“I’m glad that you’ve found what was missing from your machine. 
You’ll be able to go back home...”

“How do you know?!”

I was just coming to tell him that, against all expectations, I had succeeded in my work.

He didn't respond anything to my question, but he added:

“I’m also going back home today…”

Then, sadly:

“It’s a lot further… it’s much more difficult…”

I felt very clearly that something extraordinary was happening. 
I held him tightly in my arms like a small child; |and yet it seemed to me that he was plummeting down into an abyss, and that I could do nothing to hold on to him…

He had a serious look, lost far away.

“I have your sheep. 
And I have the box for the sheep. 
And I have the muzzle…”

And he smiled sadly.

I waited a long while. 
I could feel that he was warming back up, little by little.

“Little fellow, you were afraid…”

He had been afraid, of course! 
But he laughed softly:

“I’ll be much more afraid this evening…”

Again I felt myself frozen by the sense of something irremediable. 
And I understood then that I couldn’t bear the idea of never hearing this laugh again. 
For me, it was like a spring in the desert.

“Little fellow, I want to hear you laugh again... ”

But he said to me:

“Tonight, it will be a year. 
My star will be right above the place where I came down, last year…”

“Little fellow, isn't this a bad dream – this business with the snake and with the rendezvous and the star… ?”

But he didn’t answer my question. 
He said to me:

“That which is important cannot be seen…”

“Of course…”

“It’s like with the flower. 
If you love a flower that is on a star, it’s nice, at night, to look at the sky. 
All the stars are covered in flowers…”

“Of course…”

“It’s like with the water. 
That which you gave me to drink was like music, because of the pulley, and the rope… |you remember… it was good.”

“Of course…”

“At night you’ll look at the stars. 
It's too small where I live for me to show you where mine is located. 
It’s better like that. 
My star for you will be just one of the stars. 
So you’ll love to look at them, all of the stars… 
They’ll all be your friends. 
And, what's more, I’m going to make you a present…” 

He laughed again.

“Ah, little fellow, little fellow, I love to hear that laugh!” 

“Precisely this will be my present... it’ll be like with the water…”

“What do you mean?”

“People have stars that are not the same ones. 
For some, who travel, the stars are guides. 
For others they are nothing but little lights. 
For others, who are scholars, they are problems. 
For my businessman they were gold. 
But all of those stars stay silent. 
You will have stars as no one else has…

“What do you mean?”

“When you will look at the sky at night, because I’ll be living on one of them, because I’ll be laughing on one of them, |for you it will be like all the stars are laughing. 
You will have stars that know how to laugh!”

And he laughed again.

“And when you are comforted (one always finds consolation) you’ll be glad to have known me. 
You’ll always be my friend. 
You’ll want to laugh with me. 
And sometimes, you’ll open your window, just like that, for fun... 
And your friends will be very surprised to see you laughing as you look at the sky. 
So you’ll tell them, “Yes, the stars always make me laugh!” 
And they’ll think you’re crazy. 
I will have played a nasty trick on you…

And he laughed again.

“It‘ll be as if I’d given you, instead of stars, lots and lots of little bells that can laugh…”

And he laughed again.
Then he became serious again:

“Tonight… you know… don’t come.”

“I won’t leave you.”

“I’ll look as if I’m in pain… I’ll look a bit like I’m dying. 
It’s like that. 
Don’t come to see that. It’s not worth it…”

“I won’t leave you.”

But he was worried.

“I’m telling you this... it’s also because of the snake. 
He mustn’t bite you…  
Snakes are mean. 
They can bite you just for fun…”

“I won’t leave you.”

But something reassured him:

“It’s true that they have no poison left for a second bite... ”

That night I didn’t see him set out. 
He got away without making a sound. 
When I managed to catch him up, he was walking along determinedly, at a brisk pace. 
He said only:
 
“Oh! You're here…”

And he took me by the hand. 
But he was still worrying.

“You have been wrong. 
You’ll suffer. 
I’ll look as if I’m dead, and that won’t be true…”

I kept silent. 

“You understand. 
It’s too far. 
I can’t carry this body with me. 
It’s too heavy.”

I kept silent. 

“But it’ll be like an old abandoned shell. 
There’s nothing sad about old shells…”

I kept silent. 

He got a bit discouraged. 
But he made one more effort:

“It'll be nice, you know. 
Me too, I’ll look at the stars. 
All the stars will be wells with a rusty pulley. 
All the stars will pour water for me to drink…”

I kept silent. 

“It’ll be so much fun! 
You’ll have five hundred million little bells, and I’ll have five hundred million springs…”

And then he too was silent, because he was crying.

“It's here. 
Let me take a step by myself.”

And he sat down because he was afraid. 
He continued:

“You know… my flower… I’m responsible for her. 
And she’s so weak! 
And she’s so naïve! 
She has four thorns, of no use at all, to protect her against the world…”

I sat down because I was wasn't able to stand anymore. 
He said:

“There… that’s everything…”

He hesitated a little more, and then stood back up. 
He took a step. 
I couldn’t move.

There was nothing but a yellow flash close to his ankle. 
He remained motionless for a moment. 
He didn’t cry out. 
He fell gently, as a tree falls. 
It didn't even make any sound, because of the sand.

----NewFile----

Chapter XXVII

And now of course, it’s already been six years… 
I had never yet told this story. 
The companions who saw me again were very happy to see me alive again. 
I was sad, but I told them: “It’s because I’m tired…”

Now my sorrow is comforted a little. 
I mean… not entirely. 
But I do know that he got back to his planet, because at daybreak I didn’t find his body. 
It wasn’t a very heavy body… 
And I love to listen to the stars at night. 
It’s just like five hundred million little bells…

But there is something extraordinary thing going on. 
The muzzle that I drew for the little prince, I forgot to add the leather strap to it. 
He would never have been able to fasten it to the sheep. 
So I wonder: what happened on his planet? 
It may well be that the sheep ate the flower…

Sometimes I tell myself: “Surely not! 
The little prince encloses his flower every night under her glass dome, |and he watches over his sheep carefully…” 
Then I’m happy. 
And all the stars laugh sweetly.

Other times I tell myself: “Everyone is absent-minded at some point, and that’s all it takes! 
One evening he would have forgotten the glass dome, |or maybe the sheep got out quietly during the night…” 
And then all the little bells turn into tears…

Herein lies a great mystery. 
For you, who also love the little prince, like for me, |nothing in the universe is the same if somewhere, we don't know where, a sheep that we don't know has – has it? – eaten a rose…

Look at the sky. 
Ask yourselves: Has the sheep – yes or no – eaten the flower? 
And you will see how everything changes…

And no grown-up will ever understand that this has such importance!

This is, to me, the most beautiful and the most sad landscape in the world. 
It’s the same landscape as the one on the previous page, |but I have drawn it one more time to show it to you properly. 
It’s here that the little prince appeared on Earth, and then disappeared.

Look at this landscape carefully, so as to be sure to recognise it if one day you travel in Africa, in the desert. 
And if you happen to pass by there, I beg you, don’t hurry on, |wait a while exactly under the star.
If a child then comes to you, if he laughs, if he has golden hair, |if he doesn’t respond when questioned, you will easily guess who he is. 
So, be kind! 
Don't leave me this sad: write to me quickly that he’s back…




























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































